Add post for image reading prototype 1 (#119)
NHSDigital/prevention-services-design-history: app/posts/manage-breast-screening/2025/05/2025-05-06-image-reading-first-prototype.md

---
  title: Image reading - first prototype
  date: 2025-05-06
  tags:
    - alpha
    - prototype
    - image reading
---

> Building on the [previous design explorations](/manage-breast-screening/2025/04/existing-image-reading-design-concepts/) of breast image reading, our initial image reading prototype focuses on three key user needs for image readers: choosing which cases to read, giving opinions on cases and efficiently navigating between them. We've deferred addressing first and second read communication for future design iterations.

Reviewer: "first and second read communication" is a bit confusing to me? I can have a guess what it means, but is there any way to briefly reword this for clarity?

The majority of image reading currently happens in batches that correspond to specific clinics. An example of a clinic might be the 50 people screened in one day at a breast care centre.

Admin staff prepare clinics for screening, which may include retrieving previous mammograms ("priors") from other breast screening centres. Cases awaiting these prior images are labelled "awaiting priors".

Once prepared, staff place clinic folders on shelves in date order, separated by first and second read status. Radiologists typically select the oldest clinic, though they might prioritise second reads if an arbitration meeting is approaching.

### Why read in a batch?

Processes have evolved over time to be highly reliant on reading in batches. Breast Screening Units (BSUs) track their participants via their screening forms and these are grouped into batches by clinic.

There are processes and safeguards in place to track these clinics and make sure they move through screening in a timely manner and that no individuals get lost. It’s naturally easier to track a clinic as a whole than every participant individually. If you’re tracking work via a clinic, it makes sense to do reading by clinic.

> Reading in clinic batches has become a useful unit of work. A clinic will typically have 30 to 60 cases in it, and a radiologist might expect to complete this in an hour. Prior studies around reading order and reader fatigue have found evidence around suggested reading session durations. Research has also identified benefits of there being a defined unit of work someone can work through to ‘finish’.

Reviewer: Is there any link for the "prior studies" that could be added here?

## Image reading dashboard

Our first prototype largely recreates the current workflow of reading by batch. We list clinics in reverse-date order and show their reading status. This will need to be more sophisticated in the future when we address first vs. second reads and situations where a clinic may be partially first read and partially second read.

We've included a 'Start reading' link at the top of the page – this links directly to the oldest clinic available for reading. We're interested to see whether radiologists tend to start reading immediately or prefer reviewing the clinics first to select one to read.

![A screenshot of our image reading dashboard](dashboard.png)

When you select a clinic or ‘start reading’ it takes you through to a page showing a list of cases in the clinic and their read status. Again, users have a choice between ‘start reading’ or to select a case.

![A list of cases in a clinic to be read](clinic-list.png)

## Giving an opinion

> When a radiologist opens a case, we show high-level information about the participant with buttons to give an opinion. This works similarly to the National Breast Screening System (NBSS) – when opening a case, the relevant mammograms open in the radiologist's Picture Archiving and Communication System (PACS) image viewer. Our job is to let them record their opinion and review any relevant medical information.

Reviewer: Is this 2 sentences? Or is the second part explaining how it works in NBSS, which case a colon might be clearer?

```suggestion
When a radiologist opens a case, we show high-level information about the participant with buttons to give an opinion. This works similarly to the National Breast Screening System (NBSS). When opening a case, the relevant mammograms open in the radiologist's Picture Archiving and Communication System (PACS) image viewer. Our job is to let them record their opinion and review any relevant medical information.
```

The trade-off is that recording this more structured data may take radiologists slightly longer, which we'll need to evaluate in testing.

![Recall for assessment screen with radio choice per breast to give an opinion](add-breast-annotation.png)

### Reviewing opinions

When radiologists complete reading all cases in a clinic, they return to the clinic list page where they can review all their opinions and any cases they skipped. From there, they can navigate back to the main image reading section or revisit specific cases if needed.

![The clinic list page showing all cases with their read opinion](clinic-list-complete.png)

## How it tested

Our testing of this prototype was largely positive, with a few issues identified.

Users were able to easily navigate to a clinic and start reading. The options were familiar to them or they easily found equivalents. The general workflow of reading an individual case is similar to the current process – though a big change is in not having medical information to hand in paper form and instead needing to look for it.

> The largest issue observed was in adding annotations. Partly this is because the design is unfinished – the intention is that users can loop through the annotations and add multiple observations. The prototype has a button to ‘select location on image’ - but this was unfunctional in testing. Without selecting a specific area on the breast, users felt that the whole page felt burdensome – why not just collect this info on the main recall page?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The largest issue observed was in adding annotations. Partly this is because the design is unfinished – the intention is that users can loop through the annotations and add multiple observations. The prototype has a button to ‘select location on image’ - but this was not functional in testing. Without selecting a specific area on the breast, users felt that the whole page felt burdensome – why not just collect this info on the main recall page?
```

We’re changing the data collected to collect abnormalities per annotation – but this wasn’t clear to users so just felt like a second page required to collect information thy currently provide using one page.

We think this new process might be clearer if users first select an area on a breast, then describe what they see there.

> Other general feedback was around knowing if a clinic had been first read or second read, and who had done what. These are areas we’ve not focused on yet so it's unsurprising this wasn’t clear to users.

Reviewer: Last sentence feels a bit defensive?

```suggestion
Other general feedback was around knowing if a clinic had been first read or second read, and who had done what. These are areas we’ve not focused on yet but will return to in future.
```
